Summary.  The concept of tightly bound water, in which a reservoir of soil water is bound tightly within small soil pores but is still available for evapotranspiration, is parameterised for the first time within the land surface scheme of a fully coupled regional scale atmosphere landsurface model. The Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) regional climate model and the NOAH land surface scheme are selected and a case study is performed on the Olifants River Basin in the Limpopo region of South Africa. Accurate knowledge of water availability in this water stressed region is of great importance for adaptation and future water policy. Results of a simulation forced by ERA40 reanalysis show that the standard land surface scheme is unable to reproduce the observed runoff despite rainfall and atmospheric conditions similar to observed. This version of the model overestimates mean annual runoff by 120%. The tightly bound water scheme shows a significant improvement, reducing the bias to 22%.  The inclusion of the tightly bound water scheme has little effect on the basin average annual rainfall despite increasing annual evapotranspiration. The tightly bound water physics dampens the response of runoff to precipitation and provides additional decoupling between precipitation and runoff, increasing the variability in this relationship. Simulations with the WRF model forced with both 1980s and 2040s CCSM3 data show that the tightly bound water scheme significantly reduces runoff in different climates and projects a greater relative future decrease in runoff, from 4% to 10% for the same precipitation decrease of 2.5%. The scheme also affects the projected changes in spatially averaged 100 year return precipitation and runoff with significance at the 0.9 confidence level. Highlights  ? Tightly bound water, stored within small soil pores, is stationary within the soil but available for evapotranspiration. ? Effect on evaporation, transpiration and infiltration of rainfall. ? This concept is implemented in an atmosphere land–surface model for the first time. ? Significant improvement on runoff, reducing bias from 120% to 22% in the Olifants basin, South Africa. ? Large effect expected in other regions with high potential evaporation and high summertime precipitation. Keywords.  Catchment runoff; Tightly bound soil water; Soil water storage; Atmosphere land–surface model; Evapotranspiration; WRF regional climate modelling.  1. Introduction.  Regional climate models are now frequently used to dynamically downscale results from general circulation models (GCMs) which are currently unable to produce information on the scale necessary to assess and plan for climate change impacts. Dynamically downscaled simulations include the effects of regional topography and land–surface impacts at a resolution that is not computationally feasible with a GCM ( [Salathe et al., 2010] and [Caldwell et al., 2009]). In recent years there has been extensive development of many regional climate models, including the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model used in this study (Leung et al., 2006). There has been increasing use of the WRF model to dynamically downscale GCM results to spatial resolutions of around 10–40 km (e.g. [Salathe et al., 2010], [Caldwell et al., 2009] and [Lo et al., 2008]).  Land–atmosphere interactions are an important component of any climate model. Changes to soil moisture, vegetation and land use can feedback into the atmosphere. These feedbacks are complicated, non linear and have been identified as a key source of uncertainty in climate models ( [Seneviratne et al., 2010] and [Pitman et al., 2009]). Land–atmosphere feedbacks may be subject to significant spatial variations with some regions of the world showing particularly strong positive soil moisture precipitation coupling (Koster et al., 2004). Recent studies on soil moisture precipitation coupling have looked at the effects of indirect interactions rather than simple moisture recycling ( [Hohenegger et al., 2009] and [Alfieri et al., 2008]). Soil moisture can impact on boundary layer stability and precipitation formation and both positive and negative soilmoisture precipitation feedbacks have been simulated. In southern Africa a negative feedback has been modelled ( [Cook et al., 2006] and [New et al., 2003]). This was attributed to the decrease in surface temperatures caused by a shift from sensible to latent heating. This increases atmospheric stability thus suppressing convective activity. Soil moisture can also affect vegetation dynamics, which feedback to the atmosphere through albedo and transpiration (Baudena et al., 2008). Williams and Albertson (2005) suggest that vegetation dynamics have only a minor influence on annual transpiration in waterlimited ecosystems, with soil moisture playing a more dominant role. These complicated relationships highlight the need for high resolution models in order to simulate regional water availability.  Many advances to land surface models have been made in recent years, often concentrating on the simulation of surface energy and water fluxes and their response to atmospheric conditions. (e.g. Ek et al., 2003). Other works have investigated the sensitivity of land surface models to changes in parameters ( [Rosero et al., 2010] and [Hogue et al., 2006]), the addition of groundwater or phenology modules ( [Maxwell et al., 2011], [Rosero et al., 2009], [Jiang et al., 2009] and [York et al., 2002]) and the parameterisation of runoff (Decharme, 2007). Rosero et al. (2010) conclude that inclusion of a groundwater module tends to improve model results compared to observations at wet study sites however, Rosero et al. (2009) show that this groundwater module tended to decrease model robustness with respect to parameters. Studies compare atmosphere landsurface model results to observations such as sensible heat flux, latent heat flux, ground heat flux and ground temperature but few studies compare simulation results to runoff or river flow. There are many areas in which regional climate models simulate latent heat fluxes poorly compared to observations ( [Godfrey and Stensrud, 2010], [Feng and Houser, 2008] and [Hogue et al., 2005]).  The aspect of the atmosphere soil moisture interaction that we concentrate on in this study is the concept of tightly bound water vs mobile water. This is the idea that some water can become trapped within small pores in the soil after which it does not move under standard hydraulic conduction or diffusion. This is a wellknown concept within soil modelling communities ( [Larsson et al., 1999] and [Gazis and Feng, 2004]) and is observable in the difference in stable isotopic compositions of soil water collected from wick samplers (mobile water), suction lysimeters (mobile and some tightly bound water) and cores (all soil water) ( [Landon et al., 1999] and [Brooks et al., 2010]). Schemes modelling heat and moisture transport within the soil and coupling this to the atmosphere and boundary layer were developed as early as Zdunkowski et al. (1975) and Sievers et al. (1983). The tightly bound water process is partially represented in land–surface models by an increase in conductivity as the saturation ratio increases. Many models follow, for example, Cosby et al. (1984) where soil diffusivity and conductivity are computed using saturation values and soil moisture content combined with curve fitting parameters. The saturation and curve fitting parameters are dependent on soil type. As described in Yang et al. (1998), to determine the retention and hydraulic conductivity values for a given soil moisture via analytical methods would require vast amounts of field data for application within a regional scale model. Such parameterisation of how these variables vary with soil moisture is therefore necessary. The highlight of the Brooks et al. (2010) study (hereafter Brooks10) is the evidence that, whilst tightly bound water cannot travel through the soil to contribute to stream flow, it can be removed from the soil by evapotranspiration. This removal of tightly bound water is currently not modelled in regional atmosphere landsurface models and has the potential to change the soil moisture precipitation feedbacks and impact on modelled streamflow with respect to standard models of soil water transport. This tightly bound water physics could be described with a full and consistent description of soil water potential, diffusivity and conductivity such as that presented in Lebeau and Konrad (2010). However this would also require very detailed knowledge of the evaporation and transpiration of water within different storage or transport regimes within the soil. In order to establish the general effect of this concept on regional climate simulations we use a simplified parameterisation designed to be applicable with a spatial resolution of the order of 10 km. This paper presents the first parameterisation to include evapotranspiration of tightly bound water within a regional atmosphere landsurface model. The tightly bound and mobile water reservoirs are separated into two distinct categories instead of modelling a continuous pore size distribution. There is no maximum infiltration rate into the tightly binding soil nor is the total infiltrated water split between the two soil reservoirs unless the tightly bound water reservoir is full. Modelling such processes exactly would require modelling of the diffusivity and conductivity of water between pores of differing sizes. This first order approximation should provide sufficient detail to investigate whether the scheme has a significant effect on the climate.  This paper is arranged as follows: the theory of the tightly bound water scheme and parameterisation within the NOAH land surface model are described in Section 2. Section 3 details the testing of this new model within a case study region in South Africa with results and analysis. In Section 4 the results of simulations forced with CCSM3 data using both original and modified models are presented in order to analyse the effect of the new scheme under different climate conditions and determine the impact on predicted changes. The paper is concluded and discussed in Section 5. 2. Tightly bound water scheme within NOAH 2.1. The NOAH land surface scheme  The standard NOAH land surface model ( [Ek et al., 2003] and [Chen and Dudhia, 2001]) is a medium complexity land surface scheme used in operational weather and climate forecasting. The model computes soil temperature and soil moisture for each of four layers (with boundaries 0.1, 0.4, 1.0 and 2.0 m below the surface respectively) as well as single layer canopy moisture and snow cover. Prognostic variables include turbulent heat fluxes, and both moisture and momentum fluxes. The model includes the root zone, evapotranspiration, soil drainage and runoff and takes into account soil textures, vegetation categories (based on the MODIS landcover classification of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme) and climatologically derived monthly vegetation fraction and albedo. Vertical movement of water within the soil is described by a diffusive form of the Richard’s equation and mass conservation in which both soil water diffusivity and conductivity are functions of the soil moisture content, T. These equations are shown for each of the four soil layers in (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  In the above, dzi is the thickness of soil layer i, Ti the fraction of unit soil volume occupied by water in layer i, D is the soil water diffusivity, Kzi the hydraulic conductivity downwards out of layer i, P the precipitation, R the surface runoff, Edir the direct evaporation and Eti the transpiration out of soil layer i. Soil water diffusivity D is given by D = K(T)/(??/?T) where ?(T) is the soil water tension function and K is the hydraulic conductivity. The NOAH model follows Cosby et al. (1984) to compute K and ?(T) by K(T) = KS(T/TS)2b+3 and ?(T) = ?S/(T/TS)b, where b is a curve fitting parameter which depends on soil type. KS and ?S are respective values at saturation and also depend on soil type. The infiltration is represented by a conceptual parameterisation for subgrid treatment of precipitation and soil moisture and is related to the total unsaturated soil water capacity within the 2 m of soil (maximum soil water storage–current soil water). The drainage from bottom soil layer is controlled solely by gravity. Direct evaporation occurs from both the uppermost soil layer and the canopy layer, and transpiration is calculated by the potential Penman–Monteith equation adjusted for water availability. Vegetation and soil properties, such as minimum canopy resistance, leaf area index porosity and hydraulic and diffusive conductivity, are static for a given soil or vegetation type and given in lookup tables.  2.2. Tightly bound water scheme – theory and implementation  The concept of a tightly bound reservoir of water held within small soil pores and subsequent faster flow through larger pores is well established and the differential flow speeds and paths are considered important in modelling the transport of pollutants through the soil matrix (Kutilek et al., 2009). Up until now however, noone has modelled the effect of the evapotranspiration of the tightly bound water reservoir of water on the water fluxes in the area. Brooks10 presents evidence that the water taken up by vegetation is isotopically different to that which ends up in the streamflow. This is supported by Dawson and Ehleringer (1991) who show that even streamside trees take up water that is isotopically different to the stream water. Water from rainfall events at the beginning of the wet season is retained in the small soil pores with low matric potential. This water is used by vegetation but does not participate in translatory flow, mix with mobile water or enter the stream. Subsequent rainfall does not displace this tightly bound water, travelling instead through larger pores to reach the groundwater and eventually the stream. This scheme is depicted in Fig. 1.  (48 K)  Fig. 1. The TBW scheme. Schematic diagram showing the transport of water within the tightly bound water scheme.   Within the Mediterranean climate of the Brooks10 study site, transpiration is out of phase with the majority of the rainfall. The water from initial winter rains is locked into small pores and not released until significant transpiration occurs the following summer. Brooks10 demonstrate that during early precipitation events when the tightly bound water reservoir is being refilled runoff and streamflow are significantly reduced. Once the tightly bound water reservoir is full, streamflow responds with increasing sensitivity to the precipitation. This implies that infiltration only starts to decrease significantly when the mobilewater pores are full up and is affected little by the saturation of the tightly binding reservoir. We hypothesise that if this scheme were to be implemented in an area where the transpiration is in phase with the wet season there could be a significant effect on predicted streamflow throughout the year. The tightly binding pores will provide a reservoir of water that can be continuously emptied by transpiration and subsequently refilled throughout the wet season, removing this water from that which may eventually enter the streams.  In order to parameterise this tightly bound water (TBW) scheme within the NOAH land surface model we split the soil into two distinct reservoirs – the standard soil with mobile water (large pores; hereafter mobile water soil) and soil with tightly bound water (smaller pores; hereafter tightly binding soil). This requires two additional global variables, SMOIS_TBW, denoting the fractional moisture content of the tightly binding soil at each soil level and SICE_TBW, giving the fractional frozen water content. An additional tuneable parameter, TBWfrac, gives the fraction of the soil that constitutes the tightly bound water reservoir and is assumed to be independent of soil type. The moisture content of each soil reservoir is stored as a saturation fraction as in the standard model and input/output fluxes are adjusted with TBWfrac to take account of the reduced volume of each soil type. The properties of the mobile water soil are considered to be those given by the standard lookup tables for the NOAH model. Those of the tightly binding soil are identical to mobilewater soil with the exceptions of the saturated soil hydraulic conductivity Dksat(=KS) = 0.0 ms1 and the saturated soil diffusivity Dwsat(??S) = 0.0. As soil conductivity K and diffusivity D are calculated from the saturated values, setting these to zero effectively removes the conduction and diffusion terms from the equations. There is therefore no movement of water within the tightly binding soil, including zero drainage from the lowest soil level. The new prognostic equations for the volumetric tightly binding soil moisture are shown in (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  Pi is the remainder of the infiltration for which there was no remaining capacity in the above i  1 layers of tightly binding soil. Variables subscripted with tbw are for the tightly binding soil reservoir. In the equation for the top level of the mobile water soil the P–R term is replaced by the Pmob term in Eq. (8), denoting the infiltration for which there was no remaining capacity in the whole tightly binding reservoir. The soil moisture fractions of the tightly binding soil are updated first in order to calculate Pmob before updating the moisture fractions of the mobilewater soil. The infiltration function is calculated using the unsaturated capacity of the mobilewater soil only, on the assumption that it is within this matrix that the water will initially travel before percolating into the smaller pores if tightly binding capacity allows. This models the effect on streamflow seen in Brooks10.  Both the direct evaporation and the transpiration are calculated based on the total soil moisture content of the whole soil. Without field measurements of the evapotranspiration from tightly binding soil relative to mobile water soil we simplify the physics and reduce the number of tuneable variables by assuming that evaporation and transpiration do not happen preferentially from either soil type. The evaporative fluxes are attributed to each soil type based on the form of the evaporative equations themselves. For example, the direct evaporation is calculated as in (9)  The variable SHDFAC gives the fraction of the gridbox that is shaded by vegetation and ETP is the potential evapotranspiration calculated by a Penmanbased energy balance approach. Fxexp = 2.0, the standard value for this parameter, chosen and justified in Ek et al. (2003). Tdry is the fractional saturation value of the soil below which no direct evaporation occurs and TS the saturated soil water capacity. It is assumed in the standard model that direct evaporation only occurs from the unshaded fraction of each gridbox. Eq. (10) shows how direct evaporation from the tightly binding soil is then calculated. There is an equivalent equation for mobile water soil direct evaporation. (10) The distribution of the total transpiration flux is calculated in a similar manner (Eq. (11)), based on the original transpiration calculation. (11) Twlt is the fractional saturation wilting point of the soil below which no transpiration occurs.  The soil temperature is calculated under the assumption that the two moisture reservoirs are in thermal equilibrium. An average of the soil moisture fractions for the tightly binding and mobile water soils is used for the temperature calculations. Frozen soil water content is calculated separately for each reservoir. Surface runoff is calculated as before, as the difference between rainfall and infiltration. Underground runoff is the drainage from the lowest level of the mobile water soil. The new NOAH model conserves water to the same accuracy as the original model.  This implementation of a TBW scheme is very simplified and assumes that a linearisation of the soil pore distribution into two distinct categories is valid. In addition we assume that within each timestep the infiltrated water is able to percolate into the small pores, even in the lowest level. To improve the validity of both this assumption and the standard NOAH assumption that the amount of infiltration at each timestep is dependent on the soil capacity of the whole 2 m of soil, the soil water fluxes within the TBW scheme are updated every 60 min instead of every timestep (approximately 1 min in this study). Ideally this should apply only to the infiltrated water, however for simplicity it applies to all water fluxes within the soil. All heat fluxes and the water fluxes to the atmosphere continue to be calculated every timestep so the atmosphere response time is unchanged. The value of 1 h was chosen as timesteps of this order are generally used when hydrological land–surface models such as NOAH are forced with observational data (e.g. Wood et al., 1998). The sensitivity of the TBW scheme to this timestep is investigated in Section 3.5. 3. Case study: The Olifants basin, South Africa  To test the effects of the TBW scheme we use the NOAH model within the WRF regional climate model to simulate rainfall and runoff in the Olifants River catchment in the Limpopo region of South Africa. South Africa has been identified in previous studies as a country facing significant environmental and social challenges as a result of global climate change and predicted population growth ( [Collier et al., 2008], [Meadows, 2006] and [Tadross et al., 2005]). There is concern over potential changes to regional water availability due to changes in precipitation and evaporation (de Wit and Stankiewicz, 2006). The Limpopo region of South Africa is a semiarid region characterised by strong interannual and interseasonal variability in rainfall. The Olifants basin is already categorised as waterstressed by the Department of Water Affairs (DWA) in South Africa (McCartney et al., 2004). For the Olifants River an ecological reserve of 8.6 mm per year has been assigned by the DWA (McCartney et al., 2004). This ecological or environmental reserve was developed under the 1995 National Water Act in South Africa and is designed to quantify the annual minimum water requirement to meet basic human needs and ensure environmental sustainability of the river ecology. Water demand in the area is predicted to increase in the future due to mining activity and increased domestic and agricultural use. It is thus very important to have predictions of the potential changes in water availability in this region. Due to the complicated relationship between rainfall and runoff (Jones et al., 2006) it is necessary to model current runoff accurately for any projected changes to have value. This area has rainfall and evaporation in phase and so we expect to see an impact on runoff throughout the year with the tightly bound water scheme. 3.1. Model setup  The regional climate model used in this study is the fully compressible non hydrostatic Advanced Research Weather Research and Forecasting V3.2.1 model developed at the National Center for Atmospheric Research. There are a number of options for each of the model physics packages which include cloud and precipitation microphysics, cumulus parameterisation, longwave and shortwave radiation, planetary boundary layer physics, surface layer scheme and representation of the land surface, including soil layers. The model uses the sigma pressure coordinate in the vertical which aids simulation of flow over complex topography. Further details on the WRF model are given by Skamarock and Klemp (2008).  A high resolution domain covering the Olifants catchment area at 12 km spatial resolution is nested using oneway nesting inside a 36 km resolution domain. The position of each domain, topography of the area and outline of the Olifants basin are shown in Fig. 2. This setup allows for a sufficiently large domain to avoid potential spurious dynamic effects at the lower boundary (Seth and Giorgi, 1998), whilst keeping computational costs reasonable. The model uses 28 levels in the vertical. The defaults for relaxation zone width and nudging strength at the lateral boundaries are used. The sea surface temperature is updated at 6hourly intervals.  Fig. 2. Olifants basin and domain. Locations of the WRF domains, showing topography at the domain resolution and the outline of the Olifants River Basin.   Physical options were selected from preliminary testing to simulate precipitation over the region as accurately as possible. The WRF double moment 6class scheme includes prediction equations for both mass and number concentration for each species, allowing a more robust treatment of particle size distributions than singlemoment schemes. Convective processes are parameterised by the Betts–Miller–Janjic scheme, radiation modelled using the RRTM and Dudhia schemes for longwave and shortwave respectively, the planetary boundary layer by the MYNN Level 2.5 scheme and the surface layer physics by the corresponding MYNN surface layer scheme.  The WRF model is evaluated for the Olifants basin for a 10 year simulation forced by ERA40 ReAnalysis data produced by the European Centre for MediumRange Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) and distributed by the British Atmospheric Data Centre (ECMWF, 2006). It is assumed that since the ERA40 data produce precipitation fields closer to CRU observations than the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis, the water vapour fields are also more realistic. One month spinup is allowed for the soil moisture fields to relax from the initial conditions. The simulation runs over hydrological years (HY; October–September for this region) 1979–1989. For the standard model run no parameters are changed from the defaults. In the TBW simulation TBWfrac = 0.5 and a tuneable parameter, refkdt, is altered from its default value of 3.0 to 5.0. 3.2. Results  This section details the results for the 10 year simulations, comparing both the standard model (ERA_STD) and the new TBW model (ERA_TBW) with available observations. 3.2.1. Rainfall  Monthly rainfall is calculated for the Olifants catchment area using the basin outline shown in Fig. 2 and a climatology constructed. This climatology is shown in Fig. 3a compared to climatologies from ERA40 and the CRU TS3.0 rainfall dataset (Mitchell and Jones, 2005) for the same period, and an observational climatology for the catchment provided by the DWA (McCartney et al., 2004) for HY1920–1989. Precipitation over the region is very well simulated compared to the observations, as shown by the root mean square error (RMSE) values shown on the graphs (all with respect to DWA). The RMSE for CRU gives an estimate of the uncertainty in the observational data. Table 1 presents the total annual values, showing that the TBW scheme has decreased mean annual precipitation by 1.3%.   Fig. 3. Basline ERA climatologies, STD and TBW. (a) Rainfall climatology. (b) Runoff climatology. (c) Evapotranspiration difference, ERA_TBW–ERA_STD. (d) Monthly mean 2 m temperature difference, ERA_TBW–ERA_STD. All data area averaged over the Olifants basin. CRU, ERA40 and WRF runs are shown with data from HY1979–89, DWA for HY1920–89. All root mean square errors (RMSE) are within respect to the DWA observations.    Maps of annual mean rainfall are shown in Fig. 4. Qualitatively the ERA_STD model produces the same spatial patterns as observations although ERA_STD does not simulate the high rainfall band over the escarpment that runs approximately northwest–southeast across the basin. This is not unexpected as even with a resolution of 12 km our domain will be unable to produce the steep topographical gradients present over this region. The maximum values are also lower in the ERA_STD results but again this is to be expected due to resolution differences. In general the map results have good agreement and since the basin average values are in very good agreement with observations there is no reason to increase the resolution. Fig. 4c shows the annual mean difference between ERA_STD and ERA_TBW. Whilst the basin average annual mean difference is small, there are local variations of up to ±15%. These changes exist in both gridscale rainfall and rainfall parameterised by the cumulus scheme.   Fig. 4. (a) Rainfall maps. Map of ERA_STD mean annual rainfall HY1979–89 for comparison with (b) observational mean annual rainfall for HY1920–89 from McCartney et al. (2004). (c) Map of the percentage difference between mean annual rainfall for ERA_TBW and ERA_STD runs.   3.2.2. Runoff  Fig. 3b shows the corresponding runoff climatology for the basin. Despite the standard model producing accurate annual average rainfall the runoff is overestimated by 120% compared to the DWA naturalised runoff. This naturalised flow data is taken from McCartney et al. (2004) and is calculated by the Water Situation Assessment Model. This model uses river flow data and information about water releases from all the dams and reservoirs in the system to synthesise natural flow conditions. Even taking into account probable inaccuracies in the naturalised runoff (estimated to be approximately 10%), given the close correlation between model and observational rainfall it is clear that the original NOAH land surface model is not reproducing the correct physics to simulate runoff in the Olifants area. Implementation of the tightly bound water scheme produces results which are in much better agreement with the naturalised flow results. The data in Table 1 show that the discrepancy in average annual runoff between observations is reduced to 22% with the use of the TBW scheme.  The separation of surface and underground runoff is an important aspect of simulating runoff. Surface runoff occurs instantaneously with precipitation whereas underground runoff lags behind precipitation due to transport time within the soil. Observationally based estimates of this separation for the Olifants region give an approximate value of between 30% and 55% for the proportion of total runoff from underground ( [Xu and Beekman, 2003] and [Aston, 2000]). The underground runoff as a percentage of the total runoff increases in the TBW model. The TBW implementation thus reduces the surface runoff proportionally more than the underground runoff. Both models produce values that are within the expected range. 3.2.3. Evapotranspiration  The climatological difference in monthly evapotranspiration (the sum of direct soil evaporation and vegetation transpiration) between the ERA_STD and ERA_TBW models is presented in Fig. 3c. There are no observational datasets for actual evaporation or transpiration, however potential evaporation comparison with measurements collected by the DWA gives good agreement, with a slight overestimate by both WRF simulations (comparison not shown). The TBW scheme produces 5.0% more evaporation over the year than the standard scheme. Potential evaporation decreases by 1% in the TBW run, therefore the increased moisture fluxes to the atmosphere can be wholly attributed to the increase in soil water available for evapotranspiration in the TBW scheme.  Although there is an increase in basin average evapotranspiration which will increase the total column water vapour, there is no increase in annual average precipitation. This increase in atmospheric water may be offset by increases in atmospheric stability due to the shift in the ratio of sensible to latent heating at the surface and subsequent decreases in surface temperature, as suggested by Cook et al. (2006). This is supported by results showing a decrease in the climatological 2 m temperature (Fig. 3d) for the ERA_TBW experiment compared to ERA_STD with a climatological pattern matching the increase in evapotranspiration. This temperature decrease explains the reduction in potential evaporation seen in Table 1. 3.3. Runoff coefficient and uncertainty  The runoff coefficient is defined as the fraction of rainfall converted to runoff. This can vary with location, climate, soil and vegetation type and the intensity of the rainfall. Heavy rainfall of short duration will produce more runoff than equivalent drizzle over a longer period. The runoff coefficient is also dependent on the amount of rainfall in previous months through the moisture content of the soil, which affects both the infiltration of current rainfall and the underground runoff.  By considering annual totals instead of monthly values the effect of the time lag between infiltration and underground runoff is reduced. Fig. 5 shows the relationship between annual total rainfall and runoff for both ERA_STD and ERA_TBW. In the following analysis we approximate the relationship as linear for this relatively small range as R2 values show little difference between linear, powerlaw and exponential fits. Fig. 5 also presents the equations of the best fit lines, showing that a steeper gradient exists for ERA_STD compared to ERA_TBW. The ERA_TBW scheme acts to dampen the runoff response over the range of rainfall values seen. Regression analysis shows that the difference in these gradients is statistically significant at the 0.90 confidence level.   Fig. 5. Rainfall–runoff relationships, ERA. Rainfall–runoff relationships for both ERA_STD and ERA_TBW experiments. Linear lines of best fit are shown along with the equations and R2 values.   There is an intrinsic uncertainty in predicting runoff from rainfall and the fact that the rainfall itself is only known with a finite accuracy adds additional runoff uncertainty. For the ERA_STD model the standard error in runoff is 12.9 mm, 16% of the mean runoff value. The uncertainty in the runoff calculation from a known percentage error in the rainfall is found for the mean rainfall value, neglecting the additional uncertainty in the rainfall–runoff relationship: an x% uncertainty in rainfall translates to a 2x% uncertainty in runoff. If the uncertainty in the annual rainfall is greater than 8% then this rainfall uncertainty produces a larger uncertainty in the predicted runoff then the uncertainty in the rainfall–runoff relationship itself.  This analysis is repeated for the ERA_TBW model. The standard error increases to 28%, while the translation of a rainfall uncertainty into the runoff calculation remains similar. The implementation of the TBW scheme increases the variability in the rainfall–runoff relationship. This is physically consistent with the changes introduced with the TBW scheme as the runoff, particularly subsurface, is now influenced by increased evaporation, and thus by atmospheric variables other than precipitation. This can also be seen in the R2 values for each trend, displayed on the graph in Fig. 5. 3.4. Precipitation and runoff extremes  Two possibilities exist for the study of the impact of the TBW scheme on extreme events. The first is the study of the mechanical impact on the dynamics of individual extreme events, and the second to analyse the impact on the statistical probabilities of such events. Here we present the latter, using a Gumbel distribution to model daily extreme values of precipitation and surface runoff.  By fitting the annual maximum daily rainfall for each of the 10 years to a Gumbel distribution, the daily precipitation 100year return value (the maximum daily rainfall amount that is expected to occur on average once every 100 years) is calculated for each gridbox. These return values are shown in Fig. 6a and b for ERA_STD and ERA_TBW for an area just covering the Olifants basin. In the following, significance is defined by the 0.90 confidence level and is tested using the twosample Student’s ttest statistic under the assumption of equal variances. The TBW scheme increases the area average return value significantly by 6.3 mm, 6.5%. Fig. 6a and b shows that the location of the highest maximum daily rainfall has been shifted by the TBW scheme and the absolute value of this maximum has increased, showing that the scheme has a stronger effect on extreme precipitation on an individual gridbox level than on a spatially averaged mean, as for the annual mean precipitation in Section 3.2.  Fig. 6. 100year return values (a and b) present the 100 year precipitation return value for ERA_STD and ERA_TBW respectively. Plots (c and d) the same for the surface runoff 100 year return value.   This analysis is repeated for the daily surface runoff 100year return value. Surface runoff was chosen as it is generally responsible for localised flooding. These results are presented in Fig. 6c and d. The changes in spatial distribution reflect the changes in the precipitation results. The TBW scheme decreases the surface runoff return value significantly by 6.0 mm, or 26%, despite the increase in spatial mean precipitation return value. 3.5. Sensitivity of NOAH model to parameters  Land–surface models should be tuned in order to produce the most accurate results in a particular area. The NOAH model uses lookup tables for parameter values based on soil and vegetation types for each gridbox. Rosero et al. (2010) have shown that these parameters are not necessarily transferable solely based on vegetation type and some are more sensitive to local climatic forcing than the specific land cover classification. In this section we investigate the effects of changing some basic model parameters to test whether the results of the TBW implementation could be reproduced by simply modifying existing parameters. This is not designed to fully test the sensitivity of the model. We also study the sensitivity of the TBW model to changes to the new parameter TBWfrac and the altered parameter Refkdt to determine how tuneable this new scheme could be to other regions. Lastly, we look at the effect of changing the water flux timestep, Noahdt.  A single standard simulation is run with parameter changes intended to reproduce the effects of the TBW implementation as much as possible (named ERA_STD_2). The basic concepts are the increase of infiltration to reduce the surface runoff and the increase of evapotranspiration to remove this water from the soil matrix. All parameters were kept within the ranges specified either by the NOAH documentation or as documented by Hogue et al. (2006). The parameters changed are described below.  –  Refkdt, a tuneable parameter controlling the proportion of rainfall infiltrated into the soil; Increased from 3.0 to 6.0 in order to Increase infiltration and decrease surface runoff. –  Dksat (m/s), a parameter specifying saturated soil hydraulic conductivity and thus the soil hydraulic conductivity K for all saturation values; Values decreased by 20% for each soil type (minimum value of 5.00E7) in order to decrease downward motion of water through the soil allowing more time for evapotranspiration, though significant decrease would decrease infiltration. –  RSmin and RSmax (s/m), minimum and maximum stomatal resistance; RSmin default values decreased by 50% for each vegetation type (minimum value of 40.0); Rsmax decreased from 5000 to 3000 in order to decrease vegetation stomatal resistance, increasing transpiration.  The parameter changes had the desired effect and decreased the total annual runoff. However, the runoff decreased by only 10.2 mm/year compared to a decrease of 36.8 mm/year for the ERA_TBW run. The underground component of runoff contributed to 44% of the total runoff which is within the observational estimates. The total annual evaporation increased by 15.4 mm/year in ERA_STD_2 compared to ERA_STD, however this is still 11.3 mm/year less than the ERA_TBW run. An additional parameter that could have been changed is Fxexp as the WRF model is noted to produce values closer to observed evaporation for a semiarid environment when Fxexp = 1 (PetersLidard et al., 2008). A single year experiment showed that this change does have a noticeable effect on runoff reducing the annual total by a further 4.2 mm. This is still not sufficient to reproduce the effect of the TBW simulation. It is noted that use of this parameter change could further improve the TBW simulation compared to observations.  Simulations of ERA_TBW with different values of TBWfrac and Refkdt are also performed. The results demonstrate that the TBW scheme has the tunability to be adapted to areas with different climates and/or soil compositions. The sensitivity of the model to the range of the two parameters chosen (maximum decrease of 11.0 mm/year in total runoff) is 31% of the sensitivity to adding the TBW scheme in the first place (decrease of 36.2 mm/year).  As discussed in Section 2.2 the timestep of water flux updates within the soil (Noahdt) is increased from the model timestep of 60 s in order to improve the validity of assumptions made in the simplification of the TBW scheme. The results of simulations of 4 months during the wet season (October–January) are shown in Table 2 for Noahdt of 60, 600, 1800 and 3600 s. Due to the nonlinearity of the precipitation response to atmospheric variables, slight changes in evaporation caused by the change in soil moisture within the scheme result in changes in precipitation. Increasing the timestep decreases the runoff response, or coefficient of runoff, via increased infiltration. Increasing the timestep decreases the runoff, thus decreasing the bias the TBW scheme has with respect to the observations. There is no systematic effect on rainfall, suggesting that the small precipitation changes seen can be attributed to the internal variability within the model.  Table 2. Summary of rainfall and runoff results for 4 months of TBW simulation, showing the runoff response with different timesteps for the water flux equations of the NOAH scheme (Noahdt).  3.6. Discussion of case study  The strengths of the TBW scheme are that it is based on the physical principles shown experimentally in Brooks10 and that it can significantly improve model predictions compared to observations as demonstrated in this study. Due to the complex interactions between rainfall and runoff there are a number of factors that have the potential to affect the model results in a similar manner. The main points are addressed below.  Incorrect parameters. Section 3.5 shows that the NOAH model does not have sufficient sensitivity to the commonly tuned parameters to reproduce the results obtained with the TBW scheme. Incorrect basic model concepts, such as a freedraining lower boundary and a stationary water table at 2 m depth. York et al. (2002) look at the effect of coupling an interactive aquifer to a singlecolumn model including atmosphere and land surface physics. The inclusion of the aquifer produced slightly more runoff. Rosero et al. (2010) conclude that at wet sites the inclusion of a groundwater module may improve model results compared to observations. These studies indicate that such additions could not have sufficient impact on the standard NOAH model runoff to produce significant improvement in the Olifants region. Incorrect atmospheric climate and hence inaccurately calculated evaporation. A comparison of model climatological basin potential evaporation with measurements from the DWA (not shown) shows that the WRF model slightly overestimates potential evaporation over this region, thus this cannot be the cause of the underestimation of actual evapotranspiration. Missing physical concepts within the model. This includes the behaviour of tightly bound water as implemented in this study. There is thus a strong argument that the inclusion of the TBW scheme is not only physically justifiable but that the improvement obtained could not be easily produced by other means.  4. Climate simulations  The effect of the TBW scheme on the Olifants basin for the present day climate has been established and presented in Section 3. We now present results from the WRF model forced with CCSM3.0 general circulation model data (Collins et al., 2006) for both the present day and the future A1B scenario in order to analyse the impact of the TBW scheme under different climates, particularly when it has been tuned to a different (ERA_STD) climate. This provides evidence for how the scheme may perform in other geographical areas with different climates and whether the TBW scheme has an impact on projections of climatic changes. Simulations are run for HY1979–99 (C1980s) and for HY2039–59 (C2040s). The setup for the CCSM runs is identical to that described in Section 3.1 with the WRF model boundaries forced by CCSM3.0 data. The model CO2 is updated for the C2040s runs to 525 ppmv in line with the A1B scenario for 2050. The sea surface temperatures are updated every 6 h with CCSM values. 4.1. Baseline and future results  The rainfall and runoff climatologies for C1980s STD and TBW simulations are presented in Fig. 7a and b along with the DWA climatology and RMSE values with respect to DWA values. The bias in annual total rainfall for C1980s_STD is 13%, a similar magnitude to that between ERA_STD and DWA. However, the RMSE (with respect to the DWA climatology) value of 23.9 mm/month shows that the shape of the C1980s climatology has a large bias, compared to the RMSE of the ERA_STD simulation of 8.9 mm/month. The precipitation from the CCSM global model itself has a RMSE of 24.9 mm/month with respect to the DWA values. The bias in precipitation climatology is therefore introduced by the forcing data, not by the WRF model. The C1980s_STD average annual 2 m temperature (air temperature 2 m from the surface) is very similar to the ERA_STD simulation in both climatology, with a RMSE of less than 1 K/month, and spatial distribution. The spatial distribution of the 2 m temperature is highly dependent on altitude explaining the close correlation between the two simulations.  (55 K)  Fig. 7. C1980s and predicted changes to C2040s (a and b) show precipitation and runoff climatologies respectively for C1980s_STD and C1980s_TBW (HY1979–99) compared to the DWA observations for HY1920–89. The simulated changes to precipitation and runoff for C2040s–C1980s for STD and TBW experiments are shown in (c and d).   As the standard methodology for estimating future changes using GCM results we will take the difference between the present day and future simulations. Provided that any precipitation bias between simulated and real climate is temporally constant the high RMSE will not affect our results.  The effect of the TBW scheme on all three climates is summarised in Table 3. There is no robust effect on precipitation, however all other changes are robust and largely consistent across the three comparisons. Runoff is decreased the most in ERA40, though this could be partially due to the TBW scheme having been tuned to this particular climate. The percentage of total runoff from subsurface is increased in all simulations, but by significantly more in C1980s and C2040s than in ERA40. The increases in evaporation and slight decrease in potential evaporation are consistent in magnitude in all three climates.  Table 3. Percentage changes of TBWSTD for basin annual average values for the three climates. The runoff value is normalised to STD rainfall using the relationships in Section 4.2 to remove the change in runoff due to slight changes in rainfall.   The C2040s climate shows a basin average annual mean temperature increase of 2.2 K, slightly greater than the increase of 2 K projected by the CCSM model itself. Fig. 7c and d shows the projected changes in rainfall and runoff for the STD and TBW models. There is a projected decrease of approximately 3% in the annual total rainfall, with increases only over the late rainy season from January to April. The TBW scheme projects a slightly larger decrease in rainfall. The TBW simulation projects a greater decrease in annual runoff (13%) than the STD simulation (4%). We normalise this change to the STD projection of rainfall change to obtain the TBW runoff change excluding the additional decrease in rainfall with respect to the STD simulation. Using the powerlaw relationship between rainfall and runoff for the C2040s TBW climate, described later in Section 4.2, it can be calculated that the extra decrease in rainfall in the TBW simulation should have resulted in an additional decrease of approximately 1.4 mm, or 3%, in the runoff. Taking this into account the remaining decrease of 10% is still over twice as high as the 4% decrease projected by the original scheme. The TBW scheme therefore projects a greater decrease in available water in the future than the STD simulation for a 2.4% decrease in rainfall. 4.2. Runoff coefficient and uncertainty  The analysis completed in Section 3.3 is repeated for both CCSM simulations. Fig. 8 presents the rainfall–runoff relationships for C1980s and C2040s. Unlike the ERA40 simulations, powerlaw and exponential relationships show consistently higher R2 values for both simulations and thus the best fit relationships shown are powerlaw (chosen over exponential for physical consistency at zero rainfall, x = 0). Statistical regression analysis shows that the exponentials in the powerlaw relationships are not statistically different between the STD and TBW simulations due to the uncertainty on this relationship. This uncertainty is caused by factors such as annual temperature, wind and humidity (all affecting evaporation) and the temporal distribution of rainfall, concerning both intensity and seasonal distribution.  (35 K)  Fig. 8. Rainfall–runoff relationships, CCSM. Rainfall–runoff relationships for (a) C1980s STD and TBW, (b) C2040s STD and TBW. Powerlaw lines of best fit are shown along with the equations and R2 values.   The powerlaw rainfall–runoff relationships calculated here can be used to calculate the expected future decrease in C2040s runoff due solely to the simulated changes in precipitation. For the STD simulation the 11.3 mm precipitation decrease should correspond to a 3.5 mm decrease in runoff, which matches that simulated. For the TBW simulation the 18.0 mm precipitation change should result in a runoff decrease of 3.5 mm. This is only 60% of that simulated. This suggests that the TBW runoff is more sensitive to other climatic changes such as the increase in surface temperature which will increase potential evapotranspiration, or to the temporal distribution of precipitation. This is in agreement with the results showing a larger uncertainty on the rainfall–runoff relationships for the TBW simulations compared to the STD, seen in the R2 values in Fig. 8. 4.3. Precipitation and runoff extremes  We look at the ecological reserve for the Olifants basin and whether the probability of the annual runoff of any 1 year being below this threshold changes in the future. In particular we look at whether the TBW scheme affects any change seen. Milly et al. (2002) caution that at least 30 years of data is often required for extremes analysis. Since our intention is not to provide an absolute prediction of any changes but to establish whether the implementation of the TBW scheme may affect any predicted changes, the 20 years of data that we use here should be sufficient.  Both lognormal and gamma distributions are fitted to 70 years of DWA total annual naturalised runoff data. The lognormal fit describes the probability of annual runoff below the ecological reserve of 8.6 mm as 0.92%, or a 1 in 110 year event. The gamma distribution models the probability as 2.7%, or a 1 in 40 year event. Given that in the 70 years of data available this event has not occurred, we assume that the lognormal distribution better describes the tail end of the runoff distribution.  The lognormal percentile of 0.92% is applied to the C1980s data to find the C1980s equivalent of the ecological reserve (20.4 mm for STD and 7.9 mm for TBW). This normalises the analysis to the DWA runoff values and thus the bias between C1980s and observations is negated. The probability of annual runoff below this normalised ecological reserve is then found for the C2040s data and compared to the present day value. The results for both STD and TBW experiments show a decrease in the probability of annual runoff below this threshold, despite the overall decrease in average annual runoff. The STD simulation projects a future probability of 0.71% and the TBW scheme gives 0.49%.  Jackknife resampling analysis (Li et al., 2008) was performed on both the C1980s and C2040s data in order to obtain an estimate of the uncertainty of these probabilities. Jackknife resampling is a form of Monte Carlo analysis where multiple datasets are created by the alternate deletion of each value from the original dataset. Resampling is often used as a first step towards the definition of uncertainty bands (Prudhomme et al., 2003). The decrease in probability shown by the STD model is not statistically significant; the decrease shown by the TBW model is significant to the 0.90 confidence level. The difference between the two models is not significant.  To study precipitation and surface runoff 100year return values the analysis produced in Section 3.4 is repeated for the CCSM data. Again, stated significance is at the 0.9 confidence level. For both the C1980s and C2040s there is no significant change in precipitation between the STD and TBW simulations. Both climates show a significant decrease in runoff of 6.0 mm (C1980s) or 8.3 mm (C2040s).  The STD simulation projects a future decrease in area mean precipitation return value of 6.0 (5.4%) whilst the TBW projects a decrease of 3.2 mm (3.0%). Both of these are significant, as is the difference between the projected changes for TBW compared to STD. The STD scheme projects no significant future decrease in surface runoff whilst the TBW scheme projected a significant decrease of 2.5 mm (12.0%). Again, the difference between the simulated changes of the STD and TBW models is significant. 5. Conclusions  Water is thought to exist in a tightly bound form within small soil pores where it is still available for evapotranspiration. In this paper this concept is simplified and parameterised for the first time within an atmosphereland surface model. The WRF regional climate model is selected and a case study of the Olifants River Basin in the Limpopo region of South Africa performed using ERA40 reanalysis data as lateralboundary forcing. The results show that the standard land surface scheme is unable to reproduce the observed runoff despite being forced with rainfall and atmospheric conditions similar to those observed, with an overestimate of 120% on the naturalised annual mean runoff. The TBW scheme shows a significant improvement, reducing this bias to 22%.  The inclusion of the TBW scheme has little effect on the basin annual average rainfall despite increasing annual evapotranspiration. Analysis of 2 m air temperature shows a cooling with the use of the TBW scheme indicating that this result is consistent with increased atmospheric stability as suggested by Cook et al. (2006). Simulations for the same region with the WRF model forced with CCSM3 data provide a means of testing the TBW scheme behaviour under different climates. The TBW scheme significantly reduced runoff in all simulations. The proportional decrease in runoff is greatest in the ERA40 simulation, though this could be partially due to the TBW scheme having been tuned to this particular climate, and least in C1980s. We conclude that the existence of a reservoir of tightly bound water may have greater effect on climates with longer and less intense rainy seasons (ERA40 vs C1980s) and also in warmer climates (C2040s vs C1980s). These are physically consistent conclusions as increasing the duration of the rainy season or the surface temperature is likely to increase evaporation from the tightly bound water reservoir during the rainy season when the largest effect on runoff is seen. Further study in other areas and climates is required to confirm these conclusions. Simulations of runoff in other semiarid regions may benefit from the inclusion of this scheme. For example Hogue et al. (2005) find that the NOAH land surface model consistently underestimates the latent heat fluxes in a semiarid area in southern Arizona whilst Feng and Houser (2008) also find that the NOAH model underestimates evaporation and consequently overestimates runoff in the Mississippi river basin. The new parameterisation may bring most benefit to areas with a strong seasonal cycle and high potential evaporation during the wet season. There may also be benefit to precipitation simulation in regions with a Mediterranean climate if the region has strong soil–moisture–precipitation coupling. Water from the winter wet season may be stored in the tightly binding soil for evaporation in the following summer which may impact on summer rainfall simulation.  Inclusion of the TBW scheme increases the projected relative decrease in both total and underground runoff in future simulations, suggesting that implementation of the new physics considered here is important for accurate simulation of future runoff changes in semiarid regions.  The implementation of the tightly bound water physics dampens the response of the runoff to precipitation forcing and provides additional decoupling between the precipitation and the runoff, increasing the variability in this relationship. With the rainfall–runoff relationships calculated for the Olifants basin, an x% uncertainty in rainfall translates approximately to a 2x% uncertainty in runoff for all climates and both the standard and TBW models. Analysis of the CCSM 20 year simulations suggests that the rainfall–runoff relationship is not linear, but is modelled better by a powerlaw or exponential equation. These results have implications for rainfall–runoff models which utilise a static runoff coefficient, such as the Urban Runoff and Basin Systems used in Bullard et al. (2007).  We provide evidence that the new physicallybased TBW scheme significantly improves the simulation of runoff in the Olifants River Basin and may well be applicable to other regions with similar climates.  The TBW scheme may also have an effect on the simulation of extreme rainfall and runoff events. A significant increase in the spatially averaged precipitation return value is seen in with the TBW scheme compared to the STD scheme for the simulation forced by ERA data, whilst a decrease in extreme runoff is projected as expected from the effect on annual average runoff. The increase in extreme precipitation agrees in principle with current literature suggesting that extreme events are dominated by moisture supply (e.g. Trenberth, 2011), however as significant increases are not seen in the CCSM simulations further study is required to confirm this effect. Both schemes project a decrease in the spatially averaged precipitation return value for the C2040s compared to the C1980s, with the least decrease shown by the TBW model. The difference between the two projections is significant at the 0.90 confidence level. The scheme may also have some impact on the change in the probability of annual runoff below the ecological reserve in the Olifants basin. A jackknife test suggests that the TBW scheme projects a significant decrease in the probability of annual runoff below this threshold. However, as discussed in Li et al. (2008), this method can underestimate the variance in some cases and so further simulations are required to fully establish the significance and robustness of this result.  The tightly bound water scheme has introduced a new parameter, TBWfrac, to the land surface model, governing the fraction of the soil which consists of small pores. This is currently determined by tuning the model to observations and therefore it would be of significant value to perform field study work in order to obtain a physical basis for these estimates, including its variation with soil type. Observationally based values for the evaporation from tightly bound pores would also be of use. Investigation into the comparative effect of parameterising the tightly bound water concept with a more realistic continuous soil pore distribution over the discrete 2mode distribution modelled in this study would be worthwhile. A number of studies have looked at the impact of including groundwater modules within land–surface models and it would be valuable to determine the interaction between such modules and the parameterisation of tightly bound soil water. Acknowledgements  The authors would like to thank the AXA Research Fund for providing funding for this work. We are grateful to the ECMWF for the ReAnalysis data obtained through the BADC provided by NERC. BP plc (Upstream Environmental Technology Program) is thanked for support. CCSM 6hourly output was converted to WRF input format using code provided by Peter Caldwell at the Lawrence Livermore National Lab, CA. The useful comments of two anonymous reviewers have helped improve this manuscript.