Summary. Plastic mulches are often used to improve agricultural production by suppressing soil evaporation in the vast arid and semi-arid regions. As a special surface cover, plastic mulch evidently affects the surface albedo and prevents vapour exchange between the land surface and the atmosphere, but these physical processes were not contained in the present land surface models. Therefore, simulations remarkably deviate from observations when land surface models are applied to areas with underlying plastic mulch covering. Investigating the effects of various plastic mulches assists in better understanding the atmosphere-land interaction. In this study, a detailed plastic mulch layer model, which considers the effect of plastic mulch on the radiation and heat transfer is constructed and incorporated into a land surface model Two-Big-Leaf-SHAW (TBLSHAW) to simulate the water (H2O), heat and CO2 (carbon dioxide) fluxes in an agro-ecosystem covered by plastic mulch. Data collected by Gulang Heterogeneous Underlying Surface Layer Experiment (GHUSLE) at a plastic mulch-covered cropland site in an arid region were employed to verify the model; simultaneously, the TBLSHAW model was run with the same atmospheric forcing as a comparison to investigate the effect of the plastic mulch. Results suggest that the model can appropriately simulate the water, heat and CO2 fluxes over an arid cropland. The model efficiency is high, and the mean bias error and root mean bias error between the simulated and the observed values are minor. Compared to TBLSHAW simulations, the plastic mulch with special optical properties obviously influenced the surface albedo and radiation balance. By limiting the underside soil evaporation, plastic mulch changes the energy and water transfer between the atmosphere and the land surface. The soil temperature and soil moisture are improved by the transparent plastic mulch, and the plastic mulch not only suppresses the CO2 generated by soil respiration but also affects CO2 budget as a result of the net assimilation controlled by the soil water and heat conditions.  Highlights. A plastic mulch layer was coupled into a land surface model TBLSHAW. The model can well simulate the heat, water and CO2 fluxes in a cropland with plastic mulch covered. The optical properties of plastic mulch obviously influence the surface albedo and energy balance. Soil temperature and soil moisture are improved by the clear plastic mulch. Plastic mulch cover changes the turbulent flux and CO2 budget.  Keywords. Land surface model; Plastic mulch; Heat; Water and CO2 fluxes; Arid region. 1. Introduction. Since the concept of a geoscience system was proposed in the 1970s, weather/climate studies have no longer been limited to the atmosphere per se and have focused on interactions between the atmo-, hydro- and biosphere ( [Hare, 1971] and [Karl and Trenberth, 2003]). Land ecosystems, as an important component of the earth and atmosphere interaction system, have aroused increasing interest from researchers. Vapour and CO2 exchange between an ecosystem and the atmosphere greatly depends on plant transpiration and photosynthesis ( [Collatz et al., 2000], [Davi et al., 2006], [Gerten et al., 2004], [Kuchment et al., 2006] and [Subin et al., 2011]). Climate change, in turn, acts on the atmosphere-land exchange of energy and mass ( [Chen et al., 2003] and [Goldstein et al., 2000]), thereby further feeding back to surface ecology and hydrological processes ( [Barron et al., 2012] and [Boyer et al., 2010]) and controlling vegetation growth ( [Nakano et al., 2008] and [Theurillat and Guisan, 2001]). Research on the interaction between the atmosphere and land is used to analyse the mechanisms for energy and species exchange by observing the water, heat and CO2 fluxes in various land ecosystems to formulate and improve the parameterisation schemes of land surface models to even more truly describe the physical and biochemical processes of the atmosphere-land interactions ( [Dai et al., 2004], [Dickinson et al., 2002], [Sellers et al., 1996] and [Yang et al., 1998]), thereby enhancing the accuracy of numerical weather forecasting and climate prediction ( [Delire et al., 2002] and [Zeng et al., 2002]).  As an important part of the ecosystem, the agro-ecosystem, especially land use and land cover changes, affects climate ( [Bounoua et al., 2002], [Findell et al., 2007] and [Grossman-Clarke et al., 2010]). Irrigation, tillage, and the application of new technology have greatly changed land surface characteristics ( [Haddeland et al., 2006] and [Li et al., 2009]) and are often associated with changes in vegetation and soil parameters that influence the regional and even global climate through atmospheric circulation ( [Adegoke et al., 2003] and [Lobell et al., 2008]). The development of plastic mulch technology for suppressing soil evaporation has led to the widespread use of plastic mulches in vast arid and semi-arid regions for the purpose of increasing crop production during the last 30 years. For example, in northwest China, plastic mulches are used in most parts of these regions to reduce evaporation and promote water use efficiency ( [Li et al., 2008] and [Liu et al., 2009]), where scarcity of water severely restricts agricultural development, since the yearly rainfall ranges from approximately 40 to 200 mm, whereas the potential evaporation ranges from 1500 to 3000 mm (Xie et al., 2005). Furthermore, field experiments have indicated that plastic mulch can modify soil temperature and moisture ( [Dahiya et al., 2007], [Ramakrishna et al., 2006] and [Wang et al., 2011]), which control the near-surface biological processes, including seedling germination, plant growth, and insect population dynamics ( [Anikwe et al., 2007] and [Díaz-Pérez et al., 2007]). Thus, plastic mulch is used in arid and semiarid regions. The widespread application of plastic mulch has obviously altered the surface microclimate and parameters such as soil moisture and temperature, surface albedo, roughness and aerodynamic resistance ( [Ham and Kluitenberg, 1994], [Tarara and Ham, 1999] and [Wang et al., 2011]). Numerous researchers have indicated that land surface models and atmospheric general circulation models (GCMs) are particularly sensitive to these parameters ( [Gedney and Cox, 2003], [Gettelman et al., 2011], [Kirk-Davidoff and Keith, 2008] and [Liang and Guo, 2003]). Consequently, the large area of plastic mulch covering can influence the regional weather forecasting and climate prediction by changing land surface parameters.  In recent years, with the support of a series of comprehensive surface layer experiments, numerous numerical models have been developed, particularly land surface process models, such as the Common Land Model (CoLM; Dai et al., 2003), the Simple Biosphere Model 2 (SiB2; Sellers et al., 1996), and the Canadian Land Surface Scheme (C_CLASS; Wang et al., 2002). These models contain a detailed plant canopy model, especially in regards to photosynthesis and stomatal conductance, which link the terrestrial biosphere to the atmosphere. A number of simulations of ecosystem water, heat and CO2 fluxes have been conducted by these models, and numerous meaningful conclusions have been reached ( [Arora, 2003], [Bartlett et al., 2002] and [Colello et al., 1998]). Numerical models have become an effective tool to study the ecosystem. Attention has been given to plastic mulches by meteorologists as a special surface cover. The effects of plastic mulches have been explored by numerous researchers both through field observations and numerical models ( [Bonachela et al., 2012], [Ham and Kluitenberg, 1994], [Tarara and Ham, 1999] and [Wu et al., 2007]), and the impacts of plastic mulch have been demonstrated from different perspectives by these studies. However, several limitations and difficulties still exist in former studies. (1) Plastic mulch cover significantly changes surface albedo and suppresses the vapour and CO2 exchange between the soil and the atmosphere, but these physical processes are not accounted for in the existing land surface models. Therefore, simulations have remarkably deviated from observations when land surface models have been applied to underlying plastic mulch-covered areas. (2) Although plastic mulch is widely used in arid regions, limited comprehensive surface layer experiments have been conducted on plastic mulch-covered cropland. This scarcity of observation data has made it difficult to determine the key land surface parameters and develop suitable parameterisation schemes. (3) Few studies have been conducted on the influence of physical processes, such as the radiation budget, heat and water transport, and CO2 exchange, which are often coupled together. A change in any one process can lead to changes in the others, which has typically been difficult to measure with direct methods. Accordingly, it is necessary to develop a land surface model containing a plastic mulch layer to simultaneously describe the complex physical and biochemical processes more accurately for the purpose of better understanding the energy and species exchange.  To address the aforementioned issues, the objective of this study was to develop a ground albedo parameterisation scheme based on the observations at a plastic mulch-covered cropland site during GHUSLE and to design a plastic mulch layer submodel and incorporate the submodel into a land surface model TBLSHAW to construct a new model TBLSHAW_MULCH to simultaneously simulate water, heat and CO2 flux in a soil-mulch-plant-atmosphere continuum system. The TBLSHAW_MULCH model was evaluated by comparing the simulated fluxes and soil temperature and moisture with observations and by a contrast simulation demonstrated by the TBLSHAW model with the same forcing data to investigate the impacts of the plastic mulch. The study improves model development and enhances our understanding of the interaction between cropland ecosystems and the atmosphere. Furthermore, the model can be incorporated into GCMs to assess the influence of plastic mulches on regional weather and climate.  2. Model descriptions. The physical system of a cropland ecosystem covered by plastic mulch can be described as a model that consists of a vertical, one-dimensional profile extending from the vegetation canopy, plastic mulch, and soil surface to a specified depth within the soil. The plastic mulch layer is a special aspect in this physical system, and the key question is how to addresses the interaction among plastic mulch, atmosphere, soil and vegetation. In accordance with the principles of energy, water and CO2 balance between the land and the atmosphere, a submodel for the plastic mulch layer was developed to addresses the mulch temperature and heat fluxes in the present study. The submodel was incorporated into the TBLSHAW model to simulate the vapour, heat and CO2 fluxes throughout the system, including soil profiles of temperature and moisture, for exploring the land surface characteristics with plastic mulch coverage.  2.1. Brief description of the TBLSHAW model. The TBLSHAW land surface model, which was developed from the Simultaneous Heat and Water Model (SHAW; Flerchinger and Saxton, 2000) and CoLM (Dai et al., 2003) models, was constructed for land–atmosphere interactions in semi-arid climates. The TBLSHAW applies the SHAW dynamic framework and adopts the two-big-leaf parameterisation scheme from CoLM. The primary features of the TBLSHAW model are that the water-heat coupling equation has been simplified after the analysis of soil water-heat transfer features in semi-arid climates and that several parameterisation schemes that are applicable to semi-arid climates have been derived from long-term semi-arid surface layer and soil observations. The physical system of the TBLSHAW model consists of one-layer vegetation, multi-layer soil (50 soil layers at most) and a turbulent boundary layer. The key processes are presented as follows.  2.1.1. Governing equation of the vegetation layer leaf temperature, The energy equilibrium is closely related to leaf temperature, which is determined by a two-big-leaf parameterisation scheme in such a manner that the radiation transmission and turbulent exchange are computed for both the sunny and the shaded sides of a leaf, as given by Dai et al. (2004).  (1)  where the subscript j indicates a leaf side, with the sunny (shaded) side denoted by j = 1 (j = 2) and [Tl]j is the leaf temperature (K), Cc is the canopy heat capacity (J m-2 K-1), [Rn,c]j is the net radiation absorbed by the vegetation (W m-2), [Hc]j represents the sensible heat fluxes from the foliage to the canopy air (W m-2) and [Ec]j represents the water vapour fluxes inclusive of evaporation from intercepted precipitation and vegetation evapotranspiration (kg m-2 s-1), and Lv is latent heat released in the phase change from liquid to vapour water (J kg-1). 2.1.2. Governing equation for soil-layer temperature and moisture The temperature and moisture in the soil layer was examined primarily using a water and heat transfer model that was obtained through the analysis of the temperature/moisture order of magnitude and the simplification of a complete water-heat coupling equation (Li and Sun, 2008). These expressions are given below.  (2)  (3)  in which z (m) and t (s) denote the soil depth and transfer time, respectively, T the soil temperature (K), Cs the volumetric heat capacity of soil (J m-3 K-1), cl the specific heat capacity of water (J kg-1 K-1) ?i and ?l the density of ice and liquid water (kg m-3), respectively, ?l (?i) the content of liquid water (ice) in a unit volume (m3 -3), ql the liquid water flux (m s-1), qv the vapour flux (kg m-2 s-1), Lf the latent heat released in the phase change from ice to liquid water (J kg-1), K the thermal conductivity of the soil (W m-1 K-1), and U the soil water taken by the roots (m3 m-3 s-1). 2.1.3. CO2 balance The CO2 flux budget within the canopy can be described as  (4) Fc=-[An]j=1-[An]j=2+Rs, where Fc is the CO2 flux from the canopy to the atmosphere (mol m-2 s-1), [An]j is the net CO2 assimilation of the canopy by sunlit and shaded leaves (mol m-2 s-1), and Rs is the CO2 flux from the soil surface (mol m-2 s-1). Rs can be written as (5)  where R0 is the soil respiration at a reference temperature (mol m-2 s-1), Ts is the soil surface temperature (K), and Q10 is a temperature constant (Wang et al., 2006). The net CO2 assimilation An is related to the canopy photosynthesis and leaf stomatal conductance. Therefore, a semiempirical An-gs model that was implemented in CoLM was adopted in TBLSHAW, and this model can be expressed through the following equations (Dai et al., 2004):  (6)  (7) gl(es-ea)=gs(ei-es) (8)  where m is the stomatal slope factor, b is the minimum stomatal conductance (mol m-2 s-1), hs is the relative humidity at the leaf surface, p is the atmospheric pressure (pa), gs (gl) is the stomatal (leaf boundary) conductance (mol m-2 s-1), and ca (ea), cs (es), ci (ei) are the partial pressure of CO2 (water) in the canopy air space, at the leaf surface and on the interior of the leaf (pa). 2.2. Description of the plastic mulch layer submodel. 2.2.1. Energy balance equations for the plastic mulch layer submodel The energy balance equations in the submodel for the plastic mulch layer are based on the following assumptions. (1) The plastic mulch completely suppresses soil evaporation and CO2 flux created by soil respiration because plastic mulches are air tight. (2) Plants can break through the plastic mulch, but the holes are small enough that the potential impacts of vapour transfer between the soil and the atmosphere through the plant are negligible (Ham and Kluitenberg, 1994). (3) Heat transfer that occurs by evaporation or condensation between the mulch and the soil surface can be ignored in comparison to the latent heat transfer between the soil and the atmosphere. (4) The heat capacity of plastic mulch is low; therefore, the heat storage within the plastic mulch can be ignored. In accordance with these assumptions, a physical representation of a soil-mulch-vegetation-atmosphere system is illustrated in Fig. 1. As shown in Fig. 1, the surface (mulch and soil) energy balance equations can be expressed by the following equations:  (9)  (10) (11)  (12)  where Rn,g, Rn,m, and Rn,s are the net radiation absorbed by the surface, the plastic mulch and the soil (W m-2), Hg, Hm, and Hs are the sensible heat fluxes from the surface (W m-2), plastic mulch, and soil to the atmosphere, Hm,p, Hs,p are the sensible heat fluxes from the mulch and the soil to the canopy air (W m-2), Eg, Es,p are the vapour fluxes from soil that is not covered by plastic mulch to the atmosphere and the canopy air (kg m-2 s-1), G0 is the soil heat flux (W m-2), and dm, dv are the fraction of mulch and vegetation cover.  Fig. 1. The physical representation of a soil-mulch-vegetation-atmosphere system. Figure options The energy balance equations for the plastic mulch layer and the soil layer can be expressed separately by the following equations:  (13)  (14)  (15)  (16)  where Cm is the heat storage for the plastic mulch (J m-2 K-1), according to the assumption Cm = 0, Tm is the mulch temperature (K), Hm,s is the heat transfer between the mulch and the soil (W m-2), and Sw,m, Sw,s and Lw,m, Lw,s are the net shortwave and longwave radiation absorbed by the mulch layer and soil layers (W m-2). 2.2.2. Parameterisation about the plastic mulch layer The physical representation of a net radiation absorption and heat transfer model within a soil-mulch system (Fig. 2) is summarised by Ham and Kluitenberg (1994). The study addresses how the soil-mulch model can be incorporated into a land surface model.   Fig. 2. The physical representation of shortwave, longwave, and heat transfer within a soil-mulch system: (a) Shortwave transfer. (b) Longwave transfer. (c) Heat transfer. Figure options As shown in Fig. 2a, the downward shortwave radiation to the mulch surface is balanced by the reflection and the absorption of the mulch in addition to multiple reflections between the mulch and soil surface, which can be expressed by the following equations:  (17)  (18) Sw,s=(1-?s)?*tmSw, where Sw is the downward shortwave radiation (W m-2), am, tm are the shortwave absorptance and transmittance of the mulch, ?s is the soil albedo, and ?* is the function accounting for the multiple reflections of shortwave between the mulch and the soil surface. Likewise, as shown in Fig. 2b, the net longwave radiation absorptions of the soil-mulch system are determined by the emission from the mulch and the soil, the absorption of the mulch and soil, and the multiple reflections between the mulch and soil surface, which can be described by the following equations:  (19)  (20)  where Lw is the downward longwave radiation up to the surface (W m-2), em, tm,ir are the longwave radiation emittance and transmittance of the mulch, es is the soil longwave emittance, s is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, and  is the function accounting for the multiple reflections of longwave between the mulch and the soil surface. ?* and  can be expressed as the following infinite series expansions:  (21)  (22)  where ?m and ?m,ir are the albedos of the shortwave and longwave radiation. As shown in Fig. 2c, heat transfer between the mulch and the underlying soil surface is calculated by the following equation:  (23) Hm,s=(Tm-Ts)/rc, where rc stands for the thermal contact resistance at the mulch-soil interface (m2 K W-1). rc can be expressed as a function with the Rayleigh number (Ham and Kluitenberg, 1994). (24)  where rc,d, rc,c are the resistances representing conduction and convection depending on the temperature gradient and thermal stability within the soil-mulch system, ka is the thermal conductivity of air (W m-1 K-1), Pr = 0.75 is the Prandtl number of air, and Ra is the Rayleigh number. The Rayleigh number can be expressed by the following equation: (25)  where g is the acceleration of gravity (m s-2), ß is the thermal expansion coefficient of air (K-1), ? is the kinematics viscosity (m2 s-1), a is the thermal diffusivity (m2 s-1), and Ld is the distance between the mulch and the soil (m). The sensible and latent heat flux from the mulch and the soil to the atmosphere and the canopy air can be by the following equations:  (26)  (27)  where Ta and Tc are the air and canopy air temperatures (K), qs, qa, and qc are the soil surface, air, and canopy air specific humidity (kg kg-1), rh,m, rh,s, rm,p, and rs,p are the aerodynamic resistances to heat or vapour transfer from the mulch and the soil to the atmosphere and the canopy air (s m-1). Aerodynamic resistances are estimated using the Monin–Obukhov similarity theory ( [Zeng et al., 1998] and [Zeng et al., 2005]):  (32)  (33)  (34)  (35)  where  are the velocity and temperature scales for momentum and heat transfer from the soil and plastic mulch to the atmosphere and Cs is the turbulent transfer coefficient between the underlying surface and the canopy air. Vegetation albedo is related to the underlying surface, and when plastic mulch is present, the surface albedo is parameterised using the observed shortwave radiation and considering the influence of the solar zenith, which is expressed by the following equation:  (36)  where ?g is the surface albedo and h? is the solar zenith. In light of the energy balance equations and the corresponding parameterisation schemes, the plastic mulch layer submodel was incorporated into the TBLSHAW via the following procedure.  Step 1: The ground albedos were calculated (Eq. (36)), and the vegetation albedo was determined using the two-stream approximation. Step 2: The shortwave absorbed by the vegetation, mulch (Eq. (17)) and soil (Eq. (18)) was calculated according to the obtained albedos and mulch optical parameters. Step 3: The water, heat and CO2 flux and soil temperature and moisture in the system were calculated using the Newton-Raphon method. The sequence of iteration calculations were listed as follows. a. The aerodynamic resistances and friction velocity between the vegetation, mulch and soil to the atmosphere (Eqs. (32) and (33)) were calculated using the Monin–Obukhov similarity theory. b. The aerodynamic resistances between the mulch and the soil to the canopy air, (Eqs. (34) and (35)) and the leaf bulk boundary resistance were calculated. c. The leaf stomatal resistance, the CO2 created by the soil respiration and the net assimilation were calculated using the An-gs model (Eqs. (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8). d. The heat flux and resistance between the soil and the mulch (Eqs. (23), (24) and (25)) were calculated. e. According to the two-big-leaf model, the change in leaf temperature, the sensible and latent heat flux between the vegetation and the atmosphere, and the downward longwave radiation emitted by the vegetation canopy (Eq. (1)) were calculated. f. The change in mulch temperature was calculated, and the G0 was obtained using the mulch-soil energy balance equation (Eqs. (13),(14)). g. With G0 as the upper boundary, the soil heat-water coupled equation was solved for the change in soil temperature and the water profile at different nodes (Eqs. (2),(3)). h. If the leaf, mulch and soil temperature changes, ?Tl, ?Tm and ?Ts, were less than the convergence standard, the iteration ended; otherwise, the Tl = Tl + ?Tl, Tm = Tm + ?Tm, Ts = Ts + ?Ts, and the iteration returned to Step 3 until the temperatures reached the convergence criteria. Step 4: After the iteration process was complete, the water, heat and CO2 fluxes from the vegetation, mulch and soil to the atmosphere were obtained. To distinguish from the TBLSHAW model, the model containing the plastic mulch layer was named TBLSHAW_MULCH.  3. Data and methods 3.1. Data collection and site Data were collected to test the model during the Gulang Heterogeneous Underlying Surface Layer Experiment (GHUSLE) from May 27 to July 12, 2010. The GHUSLE field experiment sites are situated in Gulang, Gansu province, in northwest China. The experimental area, which is located at the southern border of the Tengger Desert, the fourth largest desert in China, is in the northern temperate arid climate on a typical loess plateau. An oasis band approximately 10 km wide in the desert is primarily used for planting crops such as corn, wheat, and sunflower by irrigation. The GHUSLE experiment set up three surface layer observation sites along an east to west profile, which were named EAST, NT, and WEST site respectively. The position of the observation sites are shown in Fig. 3. The NT site sits in cropland that is covered by plastic mulch. Both the EAST and WEST sites are in the desert. The EAST site is 3.8 km from the NT site, and the WEST site is 1.6 km from the NT site.   Fig. 3. Location of the GHUSLE observation sites. Figure options A micrometeorological tower approximately 32 m high was set up at the NT observation site. On the tower, 4-level anemographs (010C by Metone), thermographs and relative hygrographs (HMP45C21 by Vaisalla) were installed at 2.3, 7.9, 15.9, 32.5 m, with a wind direction transducer (W200P of Vector) installed at 10.8 m, three dimension (3D) sonic anemographs (CSAT3 by Campbell) and open path gas analysers for CO2 and H2O (LI27500 and LI2COR, respectively) were installed at 3.5, 13.1, 28.3 m. Moreover, a solar radiometer (CM21 by Kipp & Zonen) and a longwave radiometer (CG4 by Kipp & Zonen) for upward and downward radiation were fixed at 2 m near the tower, precipitation was measured with a rain gauge (52202 by RM.Young), soil temperature (STP01-L by Hukseflux) and moisture sensors (CS616-L by Campbell) were set at 5, 10, 20, 40 and 80 cm underground, and soil heat flux plates (HFP01SC2 L by Hukseflux) were set at 5 and 10 cm depths. Corn was planted during the observation period, and 15 plants randomly chosen to be studied, whose height was measured every day. The leaf area index was evaluated by the Normalised Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), which was measured by the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) remote sensing satellite. During the GHUSLE period, a total of six NDVI datasets were available. These data and the retrieval method given by reference were employed to calculate the leaf area index (Sun et al., 2006). Clear plastic mulch continuously covered the NT site observation field. Fig. 4a–c shows the field situation of the NT site at different times.   Fig. 4. Progression of vegetation growth at the NT site on: (a) May 30. (b) June 18. (c) June 30. Figure options A parallel experiment was also performed after GHUSLE to examine the accuracy and the reliability of the data obtained by different instruments. All of the instruments were installed on a homogeneous surface to compare the data obtained by the same types of instruments. The parallel experiment suggested that all of the instruments functioned well, observation errors were small, and the data observed was not dependent on the instruments. For the study, the data obtained during GHUSLE from June 1 to 30, 2010 (day of year 151 to 181) at the NT site were chosen.  3.2. Model input variables. The input variables for the TBLSHAW_MULCH model include the initial conditions for the soil temperature and moisture, in addition to atmosphere forcing, vegetation, mulch, and soil parameters. The soil layer was divided into 12 nodes, 0, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 cm deep. The soil temperature and moisture initialised for the model used the observed data on June 1, 2010 (DOY, 151) at the corresponding layers, and the layers not observed were assumed to be the value of the linear interpolation at the adjacent nodes. The atmosphere forcing variables are hourly air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, air pressure, precipitation, downward shortwave and longwave radiation. Hourly plant height and leaf area indexes were estimated by fitting the observed day values; the vegetation fraction was computed by the height fitted curve. Fig. 5a–c shows the plant height, leaf area index, and the vegetation fraction during the study period. The site-dependent parameters used in the model are listed in Table 1. The site-independent physical parameters and constants can be found in the CoLM and SHAW models.   Fig. 5. (a) Leaf area index. (b) Plant height. (c) Vegetation fraction.  Table 1. The input parameters for the model.   As a comparison, simulations were also presented for the TBLSHAW model using the same atmosphere forcing to investigate the effect of the plastic mulch on the heat, water and CO2 flux budget through numerical analysis.  3.3. Model assessment To evaluate the model, the following expressions were proposed (Flerchinger and Hardegree, 2004):   In the above expressions, xi is the observational value, yi is the modelling value, x is the mean observational value, and N is the number of samples.  ME ranges from negative infinity to 1.0; negative ME values indicate that the mean observation is a better predictor than the simulated values. RMBE is a measure of the squared difference between the simulated and the measured values, whereas MBE is an indicator of the bias in the simulated values compared to the observations.  4. Results and analysis. 4.1. Radiation. Net radiation is defined as the sum of the downward and upward shortwave and longwave radiation. The downward shortwave and longwave were given as the atmosphere forcing; consequently, the simulated net radiation was determined by the upward shortwave and longwave radiation. The upward shortwave (USW) depended primarily on the surface albedo, and Fig. 6a shows the average albedos at the WEST, NT and EAST sites during the GHUSLE observation period. As shown in Fig. 6a, the albedo remained nearly unchanged at the WEST site because the underlying surface was homogeneous; the albedo at NT site decreased with the growth of the vegetation and was higher than WEST and EAST site before June 10. Generally, the albedo of sand is higher than cropland (Stanhill, 1970), but the albedo of the plastic mulch-covered cropland was higher than sand, indicating that the plastic mulch significantly influenced the surface albedo. At the EAST site, the albedo was variably irregular because of the heterogeneity of the underlying surface and other random factors. Fig. 6b compares the average albedos observed at the NT site and simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH and TBLSHAW models. As shown in Fig. 6b, both models can appropriately simulate the change in the observed albedo, but the TBLSHAW_MULCH simulation more closely matched the observations, especially before June 10, with the obvious influence of the plastic mulch on the surface albedo. Furthermore, the observed and simulated USW are compared in Fig. 7a, which suggests that the TBLSHAW_MULCH model can better simulate the USW. The TBLSHAW model underestimated USW. The effect of the plastic mulch decreased with the growth of the plants, and the two simulation results became consistent. Scatter plots of the simulated and observed USW are given in Fig. 7b and c, which show that the linear regression lines near the 1:1 line, and the linear fitted coefficients were 1.02 and 0.91, with squared correlation coefficients of 0.92 and 0.91, respectively. The ME, RMSD, and MBE are listed in Table 2. All of the statistical evaluations indicate better performance from TBLSHAW_MULCH compared to TBLSHAW. The average USW simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH was 9.42 W m-2 higher than that of the TBLSHAW simulation, and at noon on a typical clear day, the USW was as high as 60 W m-2. The numerical results verified the observation that the optical properties of plastic greatly affected the surface albedo and the shortwave balance.   Fig. 6. (a) The average albedos observed at different sites during GHUSLE. (b) A comparison of the average albedo simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH and TBLSHAW model against measurements at the NT site.   Fig. 7. (a) Comparison of the upward shortwave radiation (USW) simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH and TBLSHAW models against measurements. (b) Scatter plot of USW simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH model against measurements. (c) Scatter plot of USW simulated by the TBLSHAW model against measurements.  Table 2. Statistical evaluation for upward shortwave (USW) and upward longwave radiation (ULW) for the observed values and the values simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH and the TBLSHAW models.  Fig. 8a shows the time series of the upward longwave radiation (ULW) comparison between the observation and simulations, and it is obvious that the two models generated consistent temporal variations in the ULW. TBLSHAW_MULCH differed little from the observations, but the TBLSHAW model underestimated the ULW, especially during the period when the vegetation fraction was low. Fig. 8b and c shows scatter plots of the modelled ULW against the observations, with linear regression lines near the 1:1 line; the linear fitted coefficients were 0.98 and 1.01, respectively, with squared correlation coefficients of 0.93 and 0.85, respectively. The ME, RMSD, and MBE are presented in Table 2, which reveal that the TBLSHAW_MULCH model better simulates the ULW. The above numerical analysis indicates that the longwave radiation was also influenced by the plastic mulch.   Fig. 8. As in Fig. 7 but for upward longwave radiation (ULW).  4.2. Sensible and latent heat fluxes. Fig. 9a compares the simulated and observed sensible heat flux (SEN), which indicates that both of the models captured the diurnal pattern, but the TBLSHAW underestimated and the TBLSHAW_MULCH overestimated the SEN. Scatter plots (Fig. 9b and c) shows that the fitted coefficients were 1.14 and 0.78, respectively, and the squared correlation coefficients were 0.78 and 0.62, respectively. The ME, RMSD, and MBE presented in Table 3 reveal that the TBLSHAW_MULCH simulation was more in agreement with the observations than the TBLSHAW simulation.   Fig. 9. As in Fig. 7 but for sensible heat flux (SEN).  Table 3. Statistical evaluation for sensible (SEN) and latent (LAT) heat flux for the observed values and the values simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH and the TBLSHAW models.  Fig. 10a shows the time series of the simulated and observed latent heat flux (LAT). It is apparent that both of the models captured the diurnal pattern, but the TBLSHAW_MULCH simulation more closely matched the observations. When the vegetation fraction was lower, the simulated bias of the two models was more significant; before June 10, the LAT simulated by TBLSHAW was 324 Wm-2 higher than that simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH at noon. Fig. 10b and c shows scatter plots of the modelled LAT against the observations. The fitted coefficients were 0.92 and 1.24, and the squared correlation coefficients were 0.83 and 0.67, respectively. The ME, RMSD, and MBE are presented in Table 3. The average LAT simulated by TBLSHAW was 57.3 W m-2 higher than that simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH. The numerical results verified the fact that the plastic mulch significantly restricted the evaporation from the soil surface, but the effect of the plastic gradually decreased with the growth of the vegetation. According to the simulation results, the turbulent heat fluxes were changed by plastic mulch, which exerted a potential influence not only on the net radiation distribution but also on the regional weather and climate.   Fig. 10. As in Fig. 7 but for latent heat flux (LAT).  4.3. Soil temperature. Fig. 11a compares the soil temperature (ST) between the simulations and the observations at 5 cm depth. It was obvious that TBLSHAW_MULCH simulation was consistent with the observations, but TBLSHAW underestimated ST. Fig. 11b and c shows scatter plots of the simulated ST against observations at 5 cm depth, with fitted coefficients of 1.02 and 0.99 and squared correlation coefficients of 0.97 and 0.85, respectively. The scatter point fitted line was near the 1:1 line with the TBLSHAW_MULCH simulation but remarkably deviated from the 1:1 line with the TBLSHAW simulation. The average ST simulated by TBLSHAW was 3.92 °C higher, and even up to 10 °C higher, during noon hours than that simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH.   Fig. 11. As in Fig. 7 but for soil temperature (ST) at 5 cm depth.  Table 4 presents the statistical evaluations of the simulated ST and observations at different depths. The bias between the TBLSHAW_MULCH simulation and the observed ST was small, with a ME greater than 0.82. In addition, the ST simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH was higher than that simulated by TBLSHAW, which indicates that the transparent plastic mulch significantly enhanced the top layer ST. Numerical results showed that the average ST improved by the plastic cover was approximately 3 °C.  Table 4. Statistical evaluation for soil temperature (ST) at different depths for the observed ST and the ST simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH and the TBLSHAW models.  4.4. Soil moisture. During the GHUSLE period, with no precipitation and irrigation, the observed soil moisture gradually decreased with the increase in the vegetation transpiration and root absorption. Fig. 12a–d compares the soil moisture (SM) between the simulations and observations at different depths. As shown in Fig. 12, both models simulated the dynamics of the observation, but the simulated values were lower than the observed values. Table 5 presents the evaluations of the two models, which indicates that TBLSHAW_MULCH performed better than the TBLSHAW model. The SM simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH was higher than that simulated by TBLSHAW, and the plastic mulch maintained soil moisture.   Fig. 12. Comparison of soil moisture (SM) simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH and TBLSHAW models against measurements at different depths (a) 5 cm. (b) 10 cm. (c) 20 cm. (d) 40 cm.  Table 5. Statistical evaluation for soil moisture (SM) at different depths for the observed SM and the SM simulated by the TBLSHAW_MULCH and the TBLSHAW models.  4.5. CO2 flux. The carbon exchange between the vegetation and the atmosphere depended primarily on the leaf stomatal, which controls photosynthesis and transpiration. From the above study, it can be concluded that the soil temperature and moisture changed when a cropland was covered by plastic mulch. Therefore, the vegetation processes closely related to soil heat and water conditions were affected. Fig. 13a compares the CO2 fluxes between the simulations and observations and shows that both models characterised the daily pattern. Fig. 13b and c shows scatter plots of the observed against the simulated CO2 flux by TBLSHAW_MULCH and TBLSHAW models, with fitted coefficients of 0.99 and 0.83 and squared correlation coefficients of 0.79 and 0.64, respectively. The ME of the TBLSHAW_MULCH was 0.75, and the RMSD and MBE were 0.01 mg m-2 s-1 and -0.18 mg m-2 s-1, respectively; the ME of TBLSHAW was 0.65, and the RMSD and MBE were 0.18 mg m-2 s-1 and 0.28 mg m-2 s-1, respectively. Numerical results indicated that the plastic mulch suppressed the CO2 generated by soil respiration, and the soil water and heat conditions influenced the vegetation photosynthesis.   Fig. 13. As in Fig. 7 but for CO2 flux (CO2).  5. Conclusions and discussion. Plastic mulches are used in vast arid and semi-arid regions to increase crop production, significantly affecting the land surface process. To study the energy and mass exchange between the atmosphere, vegetation, mulch, and soil, a numerical model TBLSHAW_MULCH was developed based on a land surface model TBLSHAW to simulate the water, heat and CO2 fluxes in an ecosystem. Data collected by GHUSLE at a cropland site in an arid region were used to examine the model; additionally, the TBLSHAW model was run with the same atmospheric forcing to investigate the effect of the plastic mulch. Numerical results suggest that the TBLSHAW_MULCH model reasonably simulated the water, heat and CO2 flux diurnal patterns with plastic mulch covered, with low bias error between simulated and measured values. Comparison with the TBLSHAW simulation revealed that the surface albedo and radiation balance were greatly affected and heat and vapour transfer between the land surface and atmosphere was significantly changed by plastic mulch. Soil temperature simulated by TBLSHAW_MULCH model was in close agreement with the observation, whereas the TBLSHAW model underestimated soil temperature; both of the models underestimated soil moisture, but TBLSHAW_MULCH performed better than TBLSHAW, and numerical results verified the observation that the transparent plastic mulch raised the surface soil temperature and moisture. The comparison between the simulated and observed CO2 fluxes indicated that the plastic mulch suppressed the CO2 generated by soil respiration, and the soil water and heat conditions also influenced vegetation photosynthesis.  The TBLSHAW_MULCH model proved to be an effective tool for evaluating the interaction between the atmosphere, vegetation, plastic mulch and soil. The parameterisation schemes were reasonable, and the effect of plastic mulch investigated from the numerical simulation was of value in the design of future field experiments and the development of corresponding models. However, the following limitations should be solved in the future: (1) Although the latent heat caused by condensation between the mulch and soil layers was negligible, the droplets of water attached to the underside of mulch will affect the plastic mulch optical properties, heat transfer and soil water dynamics, especially for clear mulches where mulch temperature is often lower than the soil temperature. Thus, every term associated with energy balance could be influenced by condensation. (2) The TBLSHAW_MULCH model was examined at a single point off-line simulation. Many of the vegetation, soil and plastic mulch parameters are site dependent, and the sensitivities of these parameters were not tested in this study. Hence, more filed observations should be conducted for verifying those parameters and some optimisation methods such as artificial neural network ( [Chau, 2006] and [Cheng et al., 2002]) should be employed to select appropriate parameters, thereby improving the land surface simulations. (3) Future studies are needed to incorporate these processes into the climate models for the purpose of exploring the influence of plastic mulch on regional weather and climate.  Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the National Basic Research Program of China ‘973’ Program (2012CB956200) and the Natural Science Foundation of China under the Contract (40775017).  References.